feat(docs): add note delivery docs details (#19754)
AztecProtocol/aztec-packages: docs/docs-developers/docs/aztec-nr/framework-description/note_delivery.md

---
title: Note Delivery
tags: [storage, concepts, notes]
description: Learn how to deliver notes to recipients in Aztec smart contracts using different delivery modes to balance proving time, transaction costs, and delivery guarantees.
sidebar_position: 4
---

When you create a note in an Aztec smart contract, you must deliver it to the recipient so they can use it. This page explains how note delivery works and how to choose the right delivery mode for your use case.

## Overview

In Aztec, creating a note involves two steps:
1. **Creating the note** - Adding the note hash to the note hash tree
2. **Delivering the note** - Sending the note contents to the recipient so they can decrypt and use it

Without delivery, the recipient won't know the note exists or be able to access its contents, even though the note hash is onchain.

## The `.deliver()` Method

> When you create a note using state variables like `PrivateMutable`, `PrivateSet`, `BalanceSet`, or `SinglePrivateMutable`, the creation methods return a `NoteMessage` or `MaybeNoteMessage` object. You must call `.deliver()` on this object to send the note to the recipient.

Reviewer: Do you think the reader here is aware of what is a message?

Feels confusing that above you are talking about note delivery and suddenly a message appears.

Can explain if it's not clear

            .deliver(MessageDelivery.ONCHAIN_CONSTRAINED);
    }
}
```

## Delivery Modes

Aztec provides three delivery modes that offer different tradeoffs between cost, proving time, and guarantees:

### `MessageDelivery.OFFCHAIN`

**Fully offchain delivery with no guarantees.**

This method uses unconstrained encryption with offchain delivery. It must be delivered through custom offchain infrastructure (e.g., cloud storage, peer-to-peer, QR codes). The PXE cannot automatically discover these messages - the application must handle delivery.

- **Use when:** The sender is incentivized to deliver correctly (e.g., sending to yourself, payment for goods/services where recipient must receive the note to complete the transaction)
- **Costs:** Zero transaction fees, zero proving time overhead
- **Guarantees:** None. The sender can fail to deliver or deliver incorrect content
- **Privacy:** Maximum. No onchain data is emitted

**Example use cases:**
- Change notes when transferring tokens (you're sending to yourself)
- Payments where the recipient won't provide goods/services without the note
- Messages to local accounts controlled by the sender

> - Game state updates to a server that requires them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Low-value use-cases like delivering game state updates to a game server
```

Found the formulation a bit strange.

```rust
// Change note - sender is motivated to deliver to themselves
self.storage.balances.at(sender).add(change_amount)
    .deliver(MessageDelivery.OFFCHAIN);
```

> 

Reviewer: Would put here a TODO to show how it's done in TS once the TS API is finished. I think at that point it will click for the reader.

> ### `MessageDelivery.ONCHAIN_UNCONSTRAINED`

Reviewer: Would mention here that the only purpose of this is to have the option of low-constraints while not needing to deal with the offchain message delivery infra.

If the dev was not lazy then it doesn't make sense to use this as it's more expensive than the offchain case (you have to pay for DA) while not giving you any additional guarantees.

**Onchain delivery with no content guarantees.**

- **Use when:** You need onchain backup/discoverability but the sender is still incentivized to deliver correctly
- **Costs:** DA gas fees for the encrypted log, zero proving time overhead
- **Guarantees:** Message stored onchain and retrievable, but sender can deliver incorrect content or wrong tag
- **Privacy:** High - encrypted log reveals minimal information

**Example use cases:**
- Escrow deposits where recipient won't proceed without receiving the note

> - Scenarios where sender cannot contact recipient offchain

Reviewer: Think these 2 cases are a bit too vague.

`ONCHAIN_UNCONSTRAINED` gives you basically the same guarantees as `OFFCHAIN` so even the use cases are basically the same.

> - When you want automatic backup without offchain responsibility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When you want automatic backup without needing to implement it yourself
```

think this clarifies it a bit

```rust
// Minting to an admin who controls the contract
self.storage.balances.at(admin).add(amount)
    .deliver(MessageDelivery.ONCHAIN_UNCONSTRAINED);
```

### `MessageDelivery.ONCHAIN_CONSTRAINED`

**Onchain delivery with guaranteed correct content.**

**WARNING**: This mode is [currently NOT fully constrained](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/issues/14565). The log's tag is unconstrained, meaning a malicious sender could prevent the recipient from finding the message.

> - **Use when:** The sender cannot be trusted to deliver correctly (e.g., paying fees, creating notes for others, multisig configuration changes)

Reviewer: Think this could be clarified.

Fundamentally you need to use this when you need to prove to a contract that the delivery has been done correctly. You can imagine a private NFT sale escrow contract where the escrow would be holding the NFT (the contract itself would be the NFT note owner) and then the escrow would release the NFT to the buyer once the NFT buyer pays the seller. In this case the `NFTSale::buy(...)` function would trigger the payment token transfer from the buyer to the seller and it would need to use `ONCHAIN_CONSTRAINED` delivery. If `ONCHAIN_CONSTRAINED` delivery was not used then the escrow contract would be willing to transfer the NFT without the NFT seller actually being able to then spend the money.

Note that for the transfer of the NFT from the escrow contract to the buyer you could use `OFFCHAIN` delivery because the delivery and encryption would be done in the buyer's PXE and hence there is alignment.

Think it would be nice to describe here thoroughly this case.

> - **Costs:** DA gas fees for encrypted log + nullifiers, proving time overhead for encryption and tagging

Reviewer: Do the nullifiers here refer to the constrained tagging nullifiers?

(I am not aware of there there being other nullifiers emitted in the process)

- **Guarantees:** Recipient receives correctly encrypted content (once tag constraining is implemented, recipient will be able to find it)

> - **Privacy:** Moderate - encrypted logs and nullifiers create onchain fingerprints

Reviewer: I am not super sure about these privacy ratings because it all depends on how many logs a typical app will emit.

I agree that the OFFCHAIN case will be the most private as most txs will generally use that (that's typically the payments stuff that is expected to generate a lot of tx volume).

But would say that `ONCHAIN_UNCONSTRAINED` and `ONCHAIN_CONSTRAINED` will have somewhat similar usage and hence will have also similar privacy set sizes.

**Example use cases:**
- Protocol fee payments (sender has no incentive to deliver correctly)

> - Minting tokens to arbitrary recipients

Reviewer: This feels a bit vague because it depends on the situation (i.e. there could be situations where the minter is trusted to behave)

> - Admin transfers where new admin is not the sender

Reviewer: This one feels also a bit strange because typically only an admin can transfer admin privileges (hence mentioning that the new admin is not the sender seems superfluous).

I could also imagine that admin would be trusted here to behave (given that he was granted admin privileges)

- Multisig or DAO configuration updates

```rust
// Minting to an arbitrary recipient - must guarantee delivery
self.storage.balances.at(recipient).add(amount)
    .deliver(MessageDelivery.ONCHAIN_CONSTRAINED);
```

## Choosing a Delivery Mode

Ask yourself: **"Is the sender incentivized to deliver this note correctly?"**

- **Yes, and they can contact the recipient offchain** Use `OFFCHAIN`

> - **Yes, but they cannot or prefer not to contact them offchain** Use `ONCHAIN_UNCONSTRAINED`

Reviewer: (or the lazy dev case)

- **No, the sender might not deliver correctly** Use `ONCHAIN_CONSTRAINED`

## Note Discovery and the Sender

When a note is delivered, recipients need to discover it among all the encrypted logs on the network. Aztec.nr uses a **tagging system** that requires computing a shared secret between the sender and recipient.

### Who is the "Sender"?

The "sender" for note discovery is **not the contract calling `.deliver()`**. Instead, it's the **account contract** that initiated the transaction.

When your wallet submits a transaction, the account contract calls `set_sender_for_tags(account_address)` to identify itself as the sender. This sender address is then used along with the recipient address to compute a shared secret (via [Diffie-Hellman key exchange](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/computer-networks/diffie-hellman-key-exchange-and-perfect-forward-secrecy/)), which generates the tag that allows recipients to efficiently find their notes.

**Example:** If Alice uses her account contract to call a token contract that mints tokens to Bob, the "sender for tags" is Alice's account contract address, not the token contract address.

### Discovering Notes from Unknown Senders

> **You cannot receive notes from an unknown sender** without additional mechanisms. The tagging system requires you to know the sender's address in advance to compute the shared secret needed to find the note.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**You cannot receive notes from an unknown sender** without additional mechanisms. The tagging system requires you to know the sender's address in advance to compute the shared secret needed to find the note (known as in the sender needs to be added to your wallet).
```

**c) Handshaking protocols** (not yet implemented) - A two-phase approach where senders first perform a "handshake" that notifies you of their existence, then use regular tagging afterward. This trades off either privacy (public handshake events) or performance (scanning all handshake logs).

**Workarounds for receiving notes from unknown senders:**
- Require senders to register in a contract first, then search for notes from all registered senders
- Share sender addresses through offchain communication
- Implement a custom discovery mechanism in your contract

See the [Note Discovery](../../foundational-topics/advanced/storage/note_discovery.md) documentation for technical details on the tagging mechanism.

## Delivering to Someone Other Than the Note Owner

You can deliver a note to an address other than the note's owner using `.deliver_to()`:

```rust
// Create a note owned by `owner` but deliver it to `auditor`
self.storage.balances.at(owner).add(amount)
    .deliver_to(auditor, MessageDelivery.ONCHAIN_CONSTRAINED);
```

> **Important:** The recipient (`auditor`) can see the note was created but **cannot use it** - only the owner can nullify and spend the note. The recipient also cannot see when/if the note is nullified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Important:** The recipient (e.g. an `auditor`) can see the note was created but **cannot use it** - only the owner can spend the note (this is authorized by the contract logic). The recipient also cannot see when/if the note is nullified.
```

"nullify" and "spend" are somewhat interchangeable so makes sense to mention one. Also clarified that the spending is authorized by contract logic as it's common that people think this is done just by knowing the nullifier hiding key (can explain the nuance here if not clear).

**Use cases:**

> - Compliance/auditing requirements where third parties need visibility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Traditional finance model of compliance where the third party sees all the activity (e.g. a bank)
```

> - Game servers that track all note creation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Game servers that track all note creation and then quickly serve you the game state (results in better UX)
```

Thought it's a bit unclear why you would do this with a game server

In Aztec, creating a note involves two steps:
1. **Creating the note** - Adding the note hash to the note hash tree
2. **Delivering the note** - Sending the note contents to the recipient so they can decrypt and use it

Without delivery, the recipient won't know the note exists or be able to access its contents, even though the note hash is onchain.

## The `.deliver()` Method

When you create a note using state variables like `PrivateMutable`, `PrivateSet`, `BalanceSet`, or `SinglePrivateMutable`, the creation methods return a `NoteMessage` or `MaybeNoteMessage` object. You must call `.deliver()` on this object to send the note to the recipient.

```rust
#[aztec]
pub contract PrivateToken {
    use aztec::messages::message_delivery::MessageDelivery;

    #[external("private")]
    fn mint(amount: u128, recipient: AztecAddress) {
        // Adding to the balance returns a MaybeNoteMessage
        self.storage.balances.at(recipient).add(amount)
            .deliver(MessageDelivery.ONCHAIN_CONSTRAINED);
    }
}
```

## Delivery Modes

Aztec provides three delivery modes that offer different tradeoffs between cost, proving time, and guarantees:

### `MessageDelivery.OFFCHAIN`

> **Fully offchain delivery with no guarantees.**

Reviewer 2: wdyt about saying more about what this method actually does? namely, the message is encrypted, without constraints and emitted via an oracle call, but i think thats it? Is it then accessible to the PXE and can be exported?

Author: Is that right?? Is it emitted by an oracle call? @nventuro can you explain this please - im a bit confused

- **Use when:** The sender is incentivized to deliver correctly (e.g., sending to yourself, payment for goods/services where recipient must receive the note to complete the transaction)
- **Costs:** Zero transaction fees, zero proving time overhead
- **Guarantees:** None. The sender can fail to deliver or deliver incorrect content
- **Privacy:** Maximum. No onchain data is emitted

**Example use cases:**
- Change notes when transferring tokens (you're sending to yourself)

> - Payments where the recipient won't provide goods/services without the note

Reviewer 2: can you elaborate on why this is a good example? It's not clear to me why offchain is the right use for this case

- **Costs:** DA gas fees for encrypted log + nullifiers, proving time overhead for encryption and tagging
- **Guarantees:** Recipient receives correctly encrypted content (once tag constraining is implemented, recipient will be able to find it)
- **Privacy:** Moderate - encrypted logs and nullifiers create onchain fingerprints

**Example use cases:**
- Protocol fee payments (sender has no incentive to deliver correctly)
- Minting tokens to arbitrary recipients
- Admin transfers where new admin is not the sender
- Multisig or DAO configuration updates

```rust
// Minting to an arbitrary recipient - must guarantee delivery
self.storage.balances.at(recipient).add(amount)
    .deliver(MessageDelivery.ONCHAIN_CONSTRAINED);
```

## Choosing a Delivery Mode

Ask yourself: **"Is the sender incentivized to deliver this note correctly?"**

- **Yes, and they can contact the recipient offchain** Use `OFFCHAIN`
- **Yes, but they cannot or prefer not to contact them offchain** Use `ONCHAIN_UNCONSTRAINED`
- **No, the sender might not deliver correctly** Use `ONCHAIN_CONSTRAINED`

## Note Discovery and the Sender

> When a note is delivered, recipients need to discover it among all the encrypted logs on the network. Aztec uses a **tagging system** that requires computing a shared secret between the sender and recipient.

Reviewer 2: wdyt about specifying that this is an opinionated approach by aztec.nr?
```suggestion
When a note is delivered, recipients need to discover it among all the encrypted logs on the network. Aztec.nr uses a **tagging system** that requires computing a shared secret between the sender and recipient.
```

- Share sender addresses through offchain communication
- Implement a custom discovery mechanism in your contract

See the [Note Discovery](../../foundational-topics/advanced/storage/note_discovery.md) documentation for technical details on the tagging mechanism.

## Delivering to Someone Other Than the Note Owner

You can deliver a note to an address other than the note's owner using `.deliver_to()`:

```rust
// Create a note owned by `owner` but deliver it to `auditor`
self.storage.balances.at(owner).add(amount)
    .deliver_to(auditor, MessageDelivery.ONCHAIN_CONSTRAINED);
```

**Important:** The recipient (`auditor`) can see the note was created but **cannot use it** - only the owner can nullify and spend the note. The recipient also cannot see when/if the note is nullified.

**Use cases:**
- Compliance/auditing requirements where third parties need visibility
- Game servers that track all note creation
- Analytics or monitoring services

## Code Examples

### Private Token Transfer

```rust
#[external("private")]
fn transfer(amount: u128, sender: AztecAddress, recipient: AztecAddress) {

>     // Subtract from sender - constrained delivery ensures recipient gets their note

Reviewer 2: Presumably this transaction is coming from the sender, so this could be unconstrained, right? The sender can be trusted to deliver the note to themselves.

Reviewer: Think this is the typical usecase of `OFFCHAIN` as the note can be manually added to your PXE straight away.

    self.storage.balances.at(sender)
        .sub(amount)
        .deliver(MessageDelivery.ONCHAIN_CONSTRAINED);

    // Add to recipient - constrained delivery for untrusted sender
    self.storage.balances.at(recipient)
        .add(amount)
        .deliver(MessageDelivery.ONCHAIN_CONSTRAINED);
}
```

### Admin Initialization

```rust
#[external("private")]
#[initializer]
fn constructor(admin: AztecAddress) {
    // Admin is the owner of the note and is motivated to receive it

>     // Use unconstrained delivery since we don't know if deployer is incentivized

Reviewer 2: agree with copilot

    self.storage.admin
        .initialize(AddressNote { address: admin }, admin)
        .deliver(MessageDelivery.ONCHAIN_CONSTRAINED);
}
```

> ### Self-Transfer with Change

Reviewer 2: What does this pattern demonstrate that isn't already demonstrated above? Seems like its doing the same thing.

```rust
// Change note - sender is motivated to deliver to themselves
self.storage.balances.at(sender).add(change_amount)
    .deliver(MessageDelivery.OFFCHAIN);
```

:::info TODO
This section will be updated with a complete TypeScript example showing how to extract offchain messages from transaction effects and manually deliver them once the API in Aztec.js is finalized. The full workflow example will make the offchain delivery pattern clearer.
:::

#### JavaScript Implementation

When using offchain delivery, extract and manually deliver messages in your application:

```typescript
// Send transaction and get offchain effects
const provenTx = await wallet.prove(contract.methods.transfer(...));
const { txHash } = await provenTx.send();

// Extract offchain message
const offchainEffects = provenTx.offchainEffects;
const ciphertext = offchainEffects[0].data.slice(2); // Skip identifier and recipient

// Deliver via your chosen channel (e.g., send to recipient via Signal, cloud storage, etc.)
await deliverViaMyChannel(ciphertext, recipient);

// Recipient processes the message
const txEffect = await aztecNode.getTxEffect(txHash);

> const messageContext = MessageContext.fromTxEffectAndRecipient(txEffect, recipient);

Reviewer 2: where does MessageContext come from? consider including the imports

- **No, the sender might not deliver correctly** Use `ONCHAIN_CONSTRAINED`

## Note Discovery and the Sender

When a note is delivered, recipients need to discover it among all the encrypted logs on the network. Aztec.nr uses a **tagging system** that requires computing a shared secret between the sender and recipient.

### Who is the "Sender"?

The "sender" for note discovery is **not the contract calling `.deliver()`**. Instead, it's the **account contract** that initiated the transaction.

When your wallet submits a transaction, the account contract calls `set_sender_for_tags(account_address)` to identify itself as the sender. This sender address is then used along with the recipient address to compute a shared secret (via [Diffie-Hellman key exchange](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/computer-networks/diffie-hellman-key-exchange-and-perfect-forward-secrecy/)), which generates the tag that allows recipients to efficiently find their notes.

**Example:** If Alice uses her account contract to call a token contract that mints tokens to Bob, the "sender for tags" is Alice's account contract address, not the token contract address.

### Discovering Notes from Unknown Senders

> **You cannot receive notes from an unknown sender** without additional mechanisms. The tagging system requires you to know the sender's address in advance to compute the shared secret needed to find the note (known as in the sender needs to be added to your wallet).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**You cannot receive notes from an unknown sender** without additional mechanisms. The tagging system requires you to know the sender's address in advance to compute the shared secret needed to find the note (i.e., the sender needs to be added to your wallet).
```

- Implement a custom discovery mechanism in your contract

See the [Note Discovery](../../foundational-topics/advanced/storage/note_discovery.md) documentation for technical details on the tagging mechanism.

## Delivering to Someone Other Than the Note Owner

You can deliver a note to an address other than the note's owner using `.deliver_to()`:

```rust
// Create a note owned by `owner` but deliver it to `auditor`
self.storage.balances.at(owner).add(amount)
    .deliver_to(auditor, MessageDelivery.ONCHAIN_CONSTRAINED);
```

**Important:** The recipient (e.g. an `auditor`) can see the note was created but **cannot use it** - only the owner can spend the note (this is authorized by the contract logic). The recipient also cannot see when/if the note is nullified.

**Use cases:**
- Traditional finance model of compliance where the third party sees all the activity (e.g. a bank)
- Game servers that track all note creation and then quickly serve you the game state (results in better UX)
- Analytics or monitoring services

## Code Examples

### Private Token Transfer

```rust
#[external("private")]
fn transfer(amount: u128, sender: AztecAddress, recipient: AztecAddress) {

>     // Subtract from sender - constrained delivery ensures recipient gets their note

Reviewer 2: this comment doesn't match the code below it. comment says constrained, but code says unconstrained

sidebar_position: 4
---

When you create a note in an Aztec smart contract, you must deliver it to the recipient so they can use it. This page explains how note delivery works and how to choose the right delivery mode for your use case.

## Overview

In Aztec, creating a note involves two steps:
1. **Creating the note** - Adding the note hash to the note hash tree
2. **Delivering the note** - Sending the note contents to the recipient so they can decrypt and use it

Without delivery, the recipient won't know the note exists or be able to access its contents, even though the note hash is onchain.

## The `.deliver()` Method

When you create a note using state variables like `PrivateMutable`, `PrivateSet`, `BalanceSet`, or `SinglePrivateMutable`, the creation methods return a `NoteMessage` or `MaybeNoteMessage` object. A message contains arbitrary information emitted from a contract - currently this includes notes and private events, though developers may define other message types in the future. You must call `.deliver()` on this object to send the message (containing the note) to the recipient.

> ```rust

Reviewer 2: let's update all of the code examples to use include_codes in docs/examples

2. **Manual extraction**: When the transaction is sent, you must extract the offchain message from the transaction's offchain effects (available via `provenTx.offchainEffects` in aztec.js).

3. **Manual delivery**: You deliver the message through your own channel - Signal, cloud storage, QR codes, peer-to-peer networks, etc.

4. **Manual processing**: The recipient calls `process_message` on the target contract (as an unconstrained function), passing the ciphertext and message context. This decrypts the message and processes it (e.g., adding notes to the PXE database).

The PXE cannot automatically discover offchain messages during private state sync because they are not in the log stream that nodes load from Ethereum blobs. **You are responsible for implementing both the delivery mechanism and ensuring the recipient processes the message.**

#### When to Use

- **Use when:** The sender is incentivized to deliver correctly (e.g., sending to yourself, payment for goods/services where recipient must receive the note to complete the transaction)

> - **Costs:** Zero transaction fees (no blob space), zero proving time overhead

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Costs:** Zero delivery fees (no blob space), zero proving time overhead
```
the tx still costs money

- **Guarantees:** None. The sender can fail to deliver or deliver incorrect content
- **Privacy:** Maximum. No onchain data is emitted

This is expected to be the most common delivery method when you don't need constrained delivery guarantees, as it completely eliminates blob space costs.

#### Example Use Cases

- Change notes when transferring tokens (you're sending to yourself)
- Payments where the recipient won't provide goods/services without the note
- Messages to local accounts controlled by the sender
- Low-value use-cases like delivering game state updates to a game server

```rust
// Change note - sender is motivated to deliver to themselves
self.storage.balances.at(sender).add(change_amount)
    .deliver(MessageDelivery.OFFCHAIN);
```

:::info TODO
This section will be updated with a complete TypeScript example showing how to extract offchain messages from transaction effects and manually deliver them once the API in Aztec.js is finalized. The full workflow example will make the offchain delivery pattern clearer.
:::

#### JavaScript Implementation

When using offchain delivery, extract and manually deliver messages in your application:

```typescript

> // Send transaction and get offchain effects

Reviewer 2: let's put these in docs/examples and use include_code macros so we can catch if/when the interfaces change

Author: going to do this in a different PR

const provenTx = await wallet.prove(contract.methods.transfer(...));
const { txHash } = await provenTx.send();

// Extract offchain message
const offchainEffects = provenTx.offchainEffects;
const ciphertext = offchainEffects[0].data.slice(2); // Skip identifier and recipient

// Deliver via your chosen channel (e.g., send to recipient via Signal, cloud storage, etc.)
await deliverViaMyChannel(ciphertext, recipient);

// Recipient processes the message
const txEffect = await aztecNode.getTxEffect(txHash);
const messageContext = MessageContext.fromTxEffectAndRecipient(txEffect, recipient);
await contract.methods.process_message(ciphertext, messageContext.toNoirStruct()).simulate();
```

> See the [aztec.js documentation](../../../../aztecjs/main.md) for more details on accessing transaction effects.

Reviewer 2: broken link
